Adding Rancher Turtles Overview - Integrations with Rancher Section (#1216)
rancher/rancher-docs: docs/integrations-in-rancher/cluster-api/overview.md

---
title: Overview
---

<head>
  <link rel="canonical" href="https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/integrations-in-rancher/cluster-api/overview"/>
</head>

> ## Demo

Author: I decided to move the demo to the UI section as a subsection. It covers how to install, create, and import CAPI clusters, and add monitoring to CAPI clusters all through the UI so I thought it would be a better fit there.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lGsr7KfBjgU?si=ORkzuAJjcdXUXMxh" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Installing the Rancher Turtles Operator

You can install the Rancher Turtles operator via the Rancher UI, or with Helm. The first method is recommended for most environments.

:::caution
If you already have the Cluster API (CAPI) Operator installed in your cluster, you must use the [manual Helm installation method](./overview.md#via-helm-install).
:::

> :::info prerequisite

Author: Moved prereqs to the top level before the install section.

- `rancher-turtles-system/rancher-turtles-cluster-api-operator`
- `capi-system/capi-controller-manager`

### Via Helm Install

The Helm installation options for Rancher Turtles has two paths depending on CAPI operator use:
- [Install Rancher Turtles with Cluster API Operator as a dependency](#install-rancher-turtles-with-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency).
- [Install Rancher Turtles without Cluster API Operator](#install-rancher-turtles-without-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency).

The Cluster API Operator is required for installing Rancher Turtles. You can choose whether you want to take care of this dependency yourself or let the Rancher Turtles Helm chart manage it for you. [Installing Turtles as a dependency](#install-rancher-turtles-with-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency) is simpler, but your best option depends on your specific configuration.

CAPI Operator allows for handling the lifecycle of Cluster API providers using a declarative approach, extending the capabilities of `clusterctl`. If you want to learn more about it, you can refer to [Cluster API Operator book](https://cluster-api-operator.sigs.k8s.io/).

> #### Install Rancher Turtles with `Cluster API Operator` as a Helm dependency

Author: Went with using CAPI in the document body text primarily, and used `Cluster API (CAPI) Operator` for titles to help with users who search either CAPI or Cluster API.

1. The `rancher-turtles` chart is available in https://rancher.github.io/turtles. This Helm repository must be added before installation:

```bash
helm repo add turtles https://rancher.github.io/turtles
helm repo update
```

2. As mentioned before, installing Rancher Turtles requires the [CAPI Operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-operator). The Helm chart can automatically install it with a minimal set of flags:

```bash

> helm install rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles --version v0.5.0 \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm install rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles --version <version> \
```

Similar to other areas in our docs, we should avoid listing specific versions, if possible (e.g. there are no version comparability limitations). It adds to maintenance or we end up with users installing older versions. E.g. `0.6.0` is available as of this moment.

Also, there's no `v` in the version.

```
helm search repo turtles
NAME                    CHART VERSION   APP VERSION     DESCRIPTION
turtles/rancher-turtles 0.6.0           0.6.0           Rancher Turtles is an extension to Rancher that...
```

    -n rancher-turtles-system \
    --dependency-update \
    --create-namespace --wait \
    --timeout 180s
```

> 3. This operation could take a few minutes and once completed you can review the installed controllers listed below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. This operation could take a few minutes and after completing you can review the installed controllers listed below:
```

- `rancher-turtles-controller`
- `capi-operator`

> :::note
> - If `cert-manager` is already available in the cluster, disable its installation as a Rancher Turtles dependency. This prevents dependency conflicts:
> `--set cluster-api-operator.cert-manager.enabled=false`
> - For a list of Rancher Turtles versions, refer to the [Turtles release page](https://github.com/rancher/turtles/releases).
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note

- If `cert-manager` is already available in the cluster, disable its installation as a Rancher Turtles dependency. This prevents dependency conflicts:
`--set cluster-api-operator.cert-manager.enabled=false`
- For a list of Rancher Turtles versions, refer to the [Turtles release page](https://github.com/rancher/turtles/releases).

:::
```

This is the basic, recommended configuration, which manages the creation of a secret containing the required CAPI feature flags (`CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL` enabled) in the core provider namespace. These feature flags are required to enable additional CAPI functionality.

> If you need to override the default behavior and use an existing secret (or add custom environment variables), you can pass the secret name helm flag. In this case, as a user, you are in charge of managing the secret creation and its content, including enabling the minimum required features: `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to override the default behavior and use an existing secret (or add custom environment variables), you can pass the secret name Helm flag. In this case, as a user, you are in charge of managing the secret creation and its content, including enabling the minimum required features: `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL`.
```

```bash
helm install ...
    # Passing secret name and namespace for additional environment variables
    --set cluster-api-operator.cluster-api.configSecret.name=<secret-name>
```

The following is an example of a user-managed secret `cluster-api-operator.cluster-api.configSecret.name=variables` with `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL` feature flags set and an extra custom variable:

```yaml title="secret.yaml"
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: variables
  namespace: rancher-turtles-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY: "true"
  EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET: "true"
  EXP_MACHINE_POOL: "true"
  CUSTOM_ENV_VAR: "false"
```

> :::info
> For detailed information on the values supported by the chart and their usage, refer to [Helm chart options](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values)
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info

For detailed information on the values supported by the chart and their usage, refer to [Helm chart options](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values)

:::
```

> #### Install Rancher Turtles without `Cluster API (CAPI) Operator` as a Helm dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Installing Rancher Turtles without `Cluster API (CAPI) Operator` as a Helm dependency
```

> :::note
> Remember that if you opt for this installation option, you must manage the CAPI Operator installation yourself. You can follow the [CAPI Operator guide](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/tasks/capi-operator/intro) in the Rancher Turtles documentation for assistance.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note

Remember that if you opt for this installation option, you must manage the CAPI Operator installation yourself. You can follow the [CAPI Operator guide](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/tasks/capi-operator/intro) in the Rancher Turtles documentation for assistance.

:::
```

> 1. Add the `rancher-turtles` chart from the in https://rancher.github.io/turtles Helm repository before installation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the Helm repository containing the `rancher-turtles` chart.
```

```bash
helm repo add turtles https://rancher.github.io/turtles
helm repo update
```

2. Install the chart into the `rancher-turtles-system` namespace:

```bash

> helm install rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles --version v0.5.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helm install rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles --version <version>
```

    -n rancher-turtles-system
    --set cluster-api-operator.enabled=false
    --set cluster-api-operator.cluster-api.enabled=false
    --create-namespace --wait
    --dependency-update
```

The previous commands tell Helm to ignore installing `cluster-api-operator` as a dependency.

> 3. This operation could take a few minutes and once completed you can review the installed controller listed below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. This operation could take a few minutes and after completing you can review the installed controller listed below:
```

- `rancher-turtles-controller`

## Uninstalling Rancher Turtles

> :::caution
> When installing Rancher Turtles in your Rancher environment, by default, Rancher Turtles enables the CAPI Operator cleanup. This includes cleaning up CAPI Operator specific webhooks and deployments that otherwise cause issues with Rancher provisioning.
> 
> To simplify uninstalling Rancher Turtles (via Rancher Manager or Helm command), the official Rancher Turtles Helm chart includes a `post-delete` hook that that removes the following:
> - Deletes the `mutating-webhook-configuration` and `validating-webhook-configuration` webhooks that are no longer needed.
> - Deletes the CAPI `deployments` that are no longer needed.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::caution

When installing Rancher Turtles in your Rancher environment, by default, Rancher Turtles enables the CAPI Operator cleanup. This includes cleaning up CAPI Operator specific webhooks and deployments that otherwise cause issues with Rancher provisioning.

To simplify uninstalling Rancher Turtles (via Rancher or Helm command), the official Rancher Turtles Helm chart includes a `post-delete` hook that that removes the following:
- Deletes the `mutating-webhook-configuration` and `validating-webhook-configuration` webhooks that are no longer needed.
- Deletes the CAPI `deployments` that are no longer needed.

:::
```

I can't recall if the stance has changed on using the Rancher Manager term, but we should leave it off to avoid possible issues.

Author: Went through and removed "Manager" from body text when referring to Rancher.

To uninstall Rancher Turtles:

```bash
helm uninstall -n rancher-turtles-system rancher-turtles --cascade foreground --wait
```

This may take a few minutes to complete.

> :::note
> Remember that, if you use a different name for the installation or a different namespace, you may need to customize the command for your specific configuration.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note

Remember that, if you use a different name for the installation or a different namespace, you may need to customize the command for your specific configuration.

:::
```

> Once Rancher Turtles is uninstalled, Rancher's `embedded-cluster-api` feature must be re-enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After Rancher Turtles is uninstalled, Rancher's `embedded-cluster-api` feature must be re-enabled:
```

- Enter the following:
    - **Name**: `turtles`.
    - **Index URL**: https://rancher.github.io/turtles.
- Wait for the `turtles` repository to have a status of `Active`.
- Go to `Apps` -> `Charts`.
- Filter for `turtles`.
- Click `Rancher Turtles - the Cluster API Extension`
- Click `Install` -> `Next` -> `Install`.

This will use the default values for the Helm chart, which are good for most installations. If your configuration requires overriding some of these defaults, you can either specify the values during installation from the Rancher UI or, alternatively, you can opt for the [manual installation via Helm](./overview.md#via-helm-install). If you are interested in learning more about the available values, you can check the Rancher Turtles [Helm chart reference guide](https://docs.rancher-turtles.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values).

The installation may take a few minutes and once completed you will see the following new deployments in the cluster:
- `rancher-turtles-system/rancher-turtles-controller-manager`
- `rancher-turtles-system/rancher-turtles-cluster-api-operator`
- `capi-system/capi-controller-manager`

### Via Helm Install

> This section walks through different Helm installation options for Rancher Turtles depending on CAPI operator use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several Helm installation options for Rancher Turtles, depending on CAPI operator use:
```

- [Install Rancher Turtles with Cluster API Operator as a dependency](#install-rancher-turtles-with-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency).
- [Install Rancher Turtles without Cluster API Operator](#install-rancher-turtles-without-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency).

> The Cluster API Operator is required for installing Rancher Turtles and you can choose whether you want to take care of this dependency yourself or let the Rancher Turtles Helm chart manage it for you. We recommend [installing as a dependency](#install-rancher-turtles-with-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency) for the sake of simplicity, but the best option may depend on your specific configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Cluster API Operator is required for installing Rancher Turtles. You can choose whether you want to take care of this dependency yourself or let the Rancher Turtles Helm chart manage it for you. [Installing Turtles as a dependency](#install-rancher-turtles-with-cluster-api-operator-as-a-helm-dependency) is simpler, but your best option depends on your specific configuration.
```

CAPI Operator allows for handling the lifecycle of Cluster API providers using a declarative approach, extending the capabilities of `clusterctl`. If you want to learn more about it, you can refer to [Cluster API Operator book](https://cluster-api-operator.sigs.k8s.io/).

:::info prerequisite

> Before installing Rancher Turtles in your Rancher environment, Rancher's `embedded-cluster-api` functionality must be disabled. This includes also cleaning up Rancher-specific webhooks that otherwise would conflict with CAPI ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before installing Rancher Turtles in your Rancher environment, Rancher's `embedded-cluster-api` functionality must be disabled. This also includes cleaning up Rancher-specific webhooks that otherwise would conflict with CAPI ones.
```

> To simplify setting up Rancher for installing Rancher Turtles, the official Rancher Turtles Helm chart includes a `pre-install` hook that applies these changes which are outlined below:
> - Disable the `embedded-cluster-api` feature in Rancher.
> - Delete the `mutating-webhook-configuration` and `validating-webhook-configuration` webhooks that are no longer needed.
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simplify setting up Rancher for installing Rancher Turtles, the official Rancher Turtles Helm chart includes a `pre-install` hook that applies these changes which are outlined below:
- Disable the `embedded-cluster-api` feature in Rancher.
- Delete the `mutating-webhook-configuration` and `validating-webhook-configuration` webhooks that are no longer needed.
:::
```

Since this is also mentioned under the Rancher UI install instructions, I think we should move these pre-reqs up into the installation intro section (lines 15-19)

#### Install Rancher Turtles with `Cluster API Operator` as a Helm dependency

> The `rancher-turtles` chart is available in https://rancher.github.io/turtles and this Helm repository must be added before proceeding with the installation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `rancher-turtles` chart is available in https://rancher.github.io/turtles. This Helm repository must be added before installation:
```

```bash
helm repo add turtles https://rancher.github.io/turtles
helm repo update
```

> As mentioned before, installing Rancher Turtles requires the [Cluster API Operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-operator) and the Helm chart can handle its installation automatically with a minimum set of flags:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, installing Rancher Turtles requires the [Cluster API Operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-operator). The Helm chart can automatically install it with a minimal set of flags:
```

```bash
helm install rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles --version v0.5.0 \
    -n rancher-turtles-system \
    --dependency-update \
    --create-namespace --wait \
    --timeout 180s
```

This operation could take a few minutes and once completed you can review the installed controllers listed below:
- `rancher-turtles-controller`
- `capi-operator`

:::note

> - If `cert-manager` is already available in the cluster, you can disable its installation as a Rancher Turtles dependency to avoid conflicts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If `cert-manager` is already available in the cluster, to avoid conflicts, disable its installation as a Rancher Turtles dependency:
```

`--set cluster-api-operator.cert-manager.enabled=false`
- For a list of Rancher Turtles versions, refer to [Releases page](https://github.com/rancher/turtles/releases).
:::

This is the basic, recommended configuration, which manages the creation of a secret containing the required CAPI feature flags (`CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL` enabled) in the core provider namespace. These feature flags are required to enable additional Cluster API functionality.

> If you need to override the default behavior and use an existing secret (or add custom environment variables), you can pass the secret name helm flag. In this case, as a user, you are in charge of managing the secret creation and its content, including the minimum required features: `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL` enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to override the default behavior and use an existing secret (or add custom environment variables), you can pass the secret name helm flag. In this case, as a user, you are in charge of managing the secret creation and its content, including enabling the minimum required features: `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL`.
```

```bash
helm install ...
    # Passing secret name and namespace for additional environment variables
    --set cluster-api-operator.cluster-api.configSecret.name=<secret_name>
```

The following is an example of a user-managed secret `cluster-api-operator.cluster-api.configSecret.name=variables` with `CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY`, `EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET` and `EXP_MACHINE_POOL` feature flags set and an extra custom variable:

```yaml title="secret.yaml"
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: variables
  namespace: rancher-turtles-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  CLUSTER_TOPOLOGY: "true"
  EXP_CLUSTER_RESOURCE_SET: "true"
  EXP_MACHINE_POOL: "true"
  CUSTOM_ENV_VAR: "false"
```

:::info
For detailed information on the values supported by the chart and their usage, refer to [Helm chart options](https://docs.rancher-turtles.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values)
:::

#### Install Rancher Turtles without `Cluster API Operator` as a Helm dependency

:::note

> Remember that if you opt for this installation option, you will need to manage the Cluster API Operator installation yourself. You can follow the [CAPI Operator guide](https://docs.rancher-turtles.com/docs/next/tasks/capi-operator/intro) in the Rancher Turtles documentation for assistance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember that if you opt for this installation option, you must  manage the Cluster API Operator installation yourself. You can follow the [CAPI Operator guide](https://docs.rancher-turtles.com/docs/next/tasks/capi-operator/intro) in the Rancher Turtles documentation for assistance.
```

</head>

## Architecture Diagram

Below is a visual representation of the key components of Rancher Turtles and their relationship to Rancher and the Rancher Cluster Agent. Understanding these components is essential for gaining insights into how Rancher leverages the CAPI operator for cluster management.

![overview](/img/30000ft_view.png)

## Prerequisites

Before installing Rancher Turtles in your Rancher environment, you must disable Rancher's `embedded-cluster-api` functionality. This also includes cleaning up Rancher-specific webhooks that otherwise would conflict with CAPI ones.

To simplify setting up Rancher for installing Rancher Turtles, the official Rancher Turtles Helm chart includes a `pre-install` hook that removes the following:

- Disables the `embedded-cluster-api` feature in Rancher.
- Deletes the `mutating-webhook-configuration` and `validating-webhook-configuration` webhooks, as they are no longer needed.

## Installing the Rancher Turtles Operator

You can install the Rancher Turtles operator via the Rancher UI, or with Helm. The first method is recommended for most environments.

:::caution

> If you already have the Cluster API (CAPI) Operator installed in your cluster, you must use the [manual Helm installation method](./overview.md#installing-via-helm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have the Cluster API (CAPI) Operator installed in your cluster, you must use the [manual Helm installation method](#installing-via-helm).
```

:::

### Installing via the Rancher UI

By adding the Turtles repository via the Rancher UI, Rancher can process the installation and configuration of the CAPI Extension.

1. Click **☰**. Under **Explore Cluster** in the left navigation menu, select **local**.
1. In the left navigation menu of the **Cluster Dashboard**, select **Apps > Repositories**.
1. Click **Create** to add a new repository.
1. Enter the following:
    - **Name**: turtles
    - **Index URL**: https://rancher.github.io/turtles
1. Wait until the new repository has a status of `Active`.
1. In the left navigation menu, select **Apps > Charts**.
1. Enter "turtles" into the search filter to find the Turtles chart.
1. Click **Rancher Turtles - the Cluster API Extension**.
1. Click **Install > Next > Install**.

> This process uses the default values for the Helm chart, which are good for most installations. If your configuration requires overriding some of these defaults, you can either specify the values during installation from the Rancher UI or you can [manually install the chart via Helm](./overview.md#installing-via-helm). For details about available values, see the Rancher Turtles [Helm chart reference guide](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process uses the default values for the Helm chart, which are good for most installations. If your configuration requires overriding some of these defaults, you can either specify the values during installation from the Rancher UI or you can [manually install the chart via Helm](#installing-via-helm). For details about available values, see the Rancher Turtles [Helm chart reference guide](https://turtles.docs.rancher.com/docs/reference-guides/rancher-turtles-chart/values).
```
